---
title: 'CHIL'
subtitle: 'Computers in the Human Interaction Loop'
date: 2008-12-15 00:00:00
description: CHIL was an integrated European research project with 15 project partners in Europe and in the US aiming to bring friendlier and more helpful computing services to society.
featured_image: '/images/research/chil/chil.jpg'
---

The goal of the CHIL project was to make everybody's daily life easier. CHIL was an integrated European research project with 15 project partners in Europe and in the US aiming to bring friendlier and more helpful computing services to society. Rather than requiring user attention to operate machines, CHIL services attempt to understand human activities and interaction in order to provide helpful services implicitly and unobtrusively. In CHIL, socially supportive environments proactively support human gatherings. Such environments offer, for example, meeting assistants that track and summarize human interactions in lectures, meetings, and office interactions.

The CHIL Ontology was developed to provide a formal high level description of the CHIL domain of discourse that can be efficiently used to build intelligent applications. As such, the CHIL ontology introduces a common programming language agnostic object model that can be used to formally represent elements of the CHIL domain of discourse. By using the Description Logics based Web Ontology Language (OWL DL) to model concepts, roles, and individuals of the CHIL domain of discourse it is possible to use a reasoner in order to automatically make implicit knowledge explicit, which can actually be considered as a form of artificial intelligence.

CHIL was co-funded by the European Union through the Information Society Technologies (IST) priority in the Sixth Framework Program.
